 
[ Turn over  ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಶನಲನ ಪರೀಕ್ಷೆ ಮತ್ತು ಮೌಲ್ಯನಿರ್ಾಯ ಮಂಡಲಿ  
ಮಲೆಲೀಶ್ವರಂ, ಬೆಂಗಳೂರತ - 560 003 
 
KARNATAKA SCHOOL EXAMINATION AND ASSESSMENT BOARD  
Malleshwaram, Bengaluru - 560 003  
 
2025-26ರ ಎಸ್.ಎಸ್.ಎಲ್.ಸಿ. ಮನದರ ಪರಶೆೆಪತ್ರರಕೆ - 4 
S.S.L.C. MODEL QUESTION PAPER  - 4 : 202 5-26 
 
ವಿಷಯ : ವಿಜ್ಞನನ 
Subject: SCIENCE  
 
(ಭೌತ್ ವಿಜ್ಞನನ , ರಸನಯನ ವಿಜ್ಞನನ ಮತ್ತು ಜೀವ ವಿಜ್ಞನನ / Physics, Chemistry and Biology) 
(ಆಂಗ್ಲ ಮಾಧ್ಯಮ / English  Medium ) 
 
ವಿಷಯ ಸಂಕ ೇತ : 83-E 
ಸಮಯ : 3 ಗಂಟೆ 15 ನಿಮಿಷಗಳು  ] 
ಗರಿಷಠ ಅಂಕಗಳು : 80 ]  Subject Code : 83-E 
 
[Time: 3 Hours 15 Minutes  
 
[Max. Marks: 80  
 
 
General Instructions to the Candidate:  
1. There are three parts in the question paper:  
Part A: Physics, Part B: Chemistry, Part C Biology.  
2. This question paper consists of 38 questions.  
3. Follow the instructions given against the questions.  
4. Figures in the right hand margin indicate maximum marks for the 
questions.  
5. The maximum time to answer the paper is given at the top of the 
question paper.  It includes 15 minutes for reading the question 
paper.  
2 
 83-E 
PART  – A 
( PHYSICS  ) 
I. Four  alternatives  are given  for each  of the following  questions  / incomplete  
statements.  Choose  the correct  alternative  and  write  the complete  answer  along  
with  its letter  of alphabet.          2 × 1 = 2 
1. The diameter of the reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is  
(A) pole of the mirror    
(B) centre of curvature  
(C) principal axis  
(D) aperture  
2. When three resistors of different resistance are connected in parallel  in an electric 
circuit  and switched on , the n the quantity that remains the same in all the 
resistors  is 
(A) current     
(B) potential difference  
(C) resistance     
(D) resistivity  
II. Answer  the following  questions :         2 × 1 = 2  
3. What are the reasons for overload in an electric circuit?   
  
3 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  4. Two situations of freely suspended parallel copper  wires carrying current are 
shown in the figure  given below .  
 
In which of these situation s, the wires attract  each other ? Justify your answer.  
III. Answer  the following  questions :                                 3 × 2 = 6  
5. What is the colour of danger signal lights? Why is that colour preferred ? 
6. Among nichrome and copper wire s, which  of the  wire s is used in electric fan and 
in the coils of electric heater? Why?  
7. Draw the diagram indicating the field lines of the magnetic field around a current -
carrying straight conductor.  
IV. Answer  the following  questions  :       3 × 3 = 9  
8. Draw the ray diagram to show the image formation when an object is kept 
between  ‘C’ and ‘F’ of a concave mirror. Write the nature and size of the image 
formed. [C = Centre of curvature, F = Principal Focus]  
9. Explain an experiment  to demonstrate that  a current carrying conductor placed 
in a magnetic field experiences a force.  
OR 
Explain an activity to draw  the magnetic field lines around a bar magnet using a 
compass  needle .  

4 
 83-E 
10. a) A student  clearly reads letters of a textbook only when the book is kept  at 
  a distance more than 50 cm from his eyes without difficulty. Then , 
i) identify this defect of the eye . 
ii) suggest a remedy for this defect.  
b)   When sunlight passes through the trees of a dense forest on a foggy 
 morning then the path of the beam of light appears between the trees.  
i) What is this phenomenon called?  
ii) The same phenomenon is not  normally visible in an open field.  Why? 
Write your analysis.  
OR 
a) The position of the stars  changes  apparently in the clear sky . Why?  Explain . 
b) White light is passed through the given arrangement of three  glass prisms  (X, Y, 
and Z) as shown in the figure given below .  
 
  i)  Is spectrum of light seen on the screen ?  
  ii)  What is the role of prism Z?  
V. Answer  the following  questions :     2 × 4 = 8  
11. a)  What is magnification?  Write the formula to calculate magnification of the 
  image produced by a lens.  

5 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  b)  State the laws of reflection of light.  
12.  
a) Two resistors of resistance 10 Ω and 40 Ω are connected in series  and 
connected to a 12V battery. Calculate the equivalent resistance in the 
electric circuit and the total current flowing in the circuit.  
b) A washing machine  rated 500W is used for 2 hours a day  for 30 days . 
Calculate the cost of using this appliance  at 3 Rs per 1 kWh.  
OR 
a) Resistance of a metal wire of length 2 m is 28 Ω at 20°C. If the diameter of 
the wire is 0.04 mm then, what will be the resistivity of the metal at that 
temperature?  
b) 1000 J of heat is produced each 2 seconds in a 5 Ω resistor. Find the 
potential difference across the  resistor.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 83-E 
PART  – B 
( CHEMISTRY  ) 
VI. Four  alternatives  are given  for each  of the following  questions  / incomplete  
statements.  Choose  the correct  alternative  and  write  the complete  answer  
along  with  its letter  of alphabet.                𝟑 × 𝟏 = 𝟑 
13. As the pH value of a neutral solution increase s, 
(A)  basic  property decreases and number of OH− ions increase s. 
(B)  acidic property increases and number of H+ ions decrease s. 
(C)  basic property increases and number of OH− ions increase s. 
(D)  acidic  property decreases and number of H+ions increase s. 
 
14. The ′𝒙′ in the following reaction represents,  
 
(A)  K2Cr2O7   
(B)  KMnO 4 
(C)  NaOH  
(D)  KOH  
 

7 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  15. To make pure  iron  hard and strong, the substance that is to be added  to it  is 
(A)  carbon   
(B)  zinc  
(C)  nickel  
(D)  tin 
VII. Answer  the following  questions :   3 × 1 = 3 
16. What is rancidity?  
17. Write the structural formula of the compound obtained when  one 
atom of hydrogen in ‘ethane’ is replaced by −CHO group.  
18. Aluminium articles do not c orrode easily like iron articles. Justify . 
VIII.  Answer  the following  questions :     3 × 2 = 6 
19. Analyze the list of experiments in the table  given below .  In which of the 
experiments the f ollowing salts will be produced?  
(i) An acidic salt  
(ii) A neutral salt  
Experiment No  Acid and base combination  
1 Strong acid + Weak Base  
2 Weak Acid + Strong Base  
3 Strong Acid + Strong Base  
4 Weak Acid + Weak Base  
8 
 83-E 
20. Name the  catalyst used  and the product obtained  in the hydrogenation of ethene.   
OR 
The molecular formula of the first member of a homologous series  of carbon  
compounds is CH2O (HCHO ). Determine the name and the molecular formula of  
the third member of  this group. Mention  the general name of this group . 
21. Draw the diagram to show the action of steam on metal s.  
IX. Answer the following questions:      3 × 3 = 9  
22. Write  the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions.  
a)  Calcium carbonate → Calcium oxide + carbon dioxide  
b) Hydrogen + chlorine → Hydrogen chloride  
c) Magnesium + hydrochloric acid → Magnesium chloride  + Hydrogen  
23. a) What is neutralization ?  
b) Name the acid present in the following substances.  
i) Curd  
ii) Gastric juice  
24. Explain the formation of ionic bond between sodium and chlorine atoms . 
OR 
9 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  a)   Write the c hemical  reactions to prove that aluminium oxide is an 
 amphoteric oxide.   
b)  How calcination differs from  roasting?  
X. Answer  the following  question :     1 × 4 = 4 
25. a)  Give reasons:  
i)  Carbon a toms neither form  C4 - anion nor form  C4+ cation.  
ii)   Ethanoic acid known as glacial acetic acid . 
b)  Write the structural formula of the following carbon compounds:  
i)  Butyne   
ii)  Cyclohexane  
OR 
a)  Explain the mechanism of clean sing action of soaps.  
b)  Write the differences between saturated and unsaturated carbo n 
compounds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 83-E 
PART  – C 
( BIOLOGY  ) 
XI. Four  alternatives  are given  for each  of the following  questions  / incomplete  
statements.  Choose  the correct  alternative  and  write  the complete  answer  
along  with  its letter  of alphabet.              3 × 1 = 3 
26. The process of producing new individuals in rhizopus is  
(A) spore formation  
(B) fragmenta tion  
(C) budding   
(D) regeneration  
 
27. Part of flower that develops into fruit and part of the seed that develops into root 
respectively are  
(A) Ovary and Plumule  
(B) Plumule and radicle  
(C) Ovary and radicle  
(D) Ovary and ovule  
 
11 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  28. Organisms that reproduce sexually are more likely to survive in their 
environment . Because in sexual reproduction these organisms,  
(A)  do not produce any variations.  
(B)  will not have any errors during DNA replication.  
(C)  will have the same body structure in all generations.  
(D)  will have the maximum number of successful variations in the subsequent  
  generation s. 
 
XII. Answer  the following  questions :    3 × 1 = 3 
29. What is the function of synapse?   
30. Is self -pollination possible in flowers that have only stamens? Justify your answer.  
31. The respiration rate of aquatic animals is faster  than that is found in  terrestrial 
animals . Why ? 
 
XIII.  Answer the following questions:      2 × 2 = 4  
32. What is geotropism ? Name the plant part that is positively geotropic.   
OR 
Name the hormones that perform  the following function s in humans.  
i) Controlling  the level of sugar in the blood.  
ii) Prepar ing the body to face the emergency situation . 
 
 
12 
 83-E 
33. The approximate lengths of the small intestine of the animals A and B are given in 
the below table. Observe the data in the table and answer the question.  
Animals  Length of small intestine  
A 20 to 40 feet  
B 5 to 8 feet  
Identify the herbivorous and carnivorous animal among A and B.  Support your 
conclusion .  
XV. Answer the following questions:  3 × 3 = 9  
34. a) Define the following:  
       i) Food chain     
ii) Biomagnification  
b) Mention the function of ozone . Name the chemical responsible for ozone 
 depletion.   
35. a) A short pea plant (tt) is crossed with a tall pea plant (TT). Express the  
  result obtained in the F 2 generation with the help of checkerboard.  
b) How is  the baby girl sex will be determined?  
OR 
Round and yellow seeds (RrYy) producing pea plants are self -pollinated . Express 
the result obtained  in this crossing  with the help of a  checkerboard . Mention  the 
types of  the plants obtained .  
36. In a situation  where  we withdraw our leg when stepped on thorn unknowingly , 
i)  Write  the sequences of events that  occur to give the response in  this 
situation . 
ii)  Which part of human nervous system controls this action?  
 
13 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  XVI.  Answer  the following  question : 1 × 4 = 4 
37. Draw the diagram showing the structure of the human heart .  Label the following 
parts:  
i)  Superior vena  cava   
ii)  Left ventricle  
XVII.  Answer  the following  question  :  1 x 5 = 5 
38. a)  What happens if egg does not fertilize  in human female reproductive  
  system ? Explain briefly.  
b)  List any four  advantages of vegetative propagation.  
c)  Write two examples for the organisms that reproduce by binary fission.   
OR 
a)  In women , how does a fertilized egg develop into an embryo in the uterus?  
b) Is surgical contraception a better method of contraception than physical 
contraception?  Justify your answer.  
c)  Write the function of testes  in human male reproductive system.  
**************  
 