 
[ Turn over  ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ ಶನಲನ ಪರೀಕ್ಷೆ ಮತ್ತು ಮೌಲ್ಯನಿರ್ಾಯ ಮಂಡಲಿ  
ಮಲೆಲೀಶ್ವರಂ, ಬೆಂಗಳೂರತ - 560 003 
 
KARNATAKA SCHOOL EXAMINATION AND ASSESSMENT BOARD  
Malleshwaram, Bengaluru - 560 003  
 
2025-26ರ ಎಸ್.ಎಸ್.ಎಲ್.ಸಿ. ಮನದರ ಪರಶೆೆಪತ್ರರಕೆ - 4 
S.S.L.C. MODEL QUESTION PAPER  - 4 : 202 5-26 
 
ವಿಷಯ : ವಿಜ್ಞನನ 
Subject: SCIENCE  
 
(ಭೌತ್ ವಿಜ್ಞನನ , ರಸನಯನ ವಿಜ್ಞನನ ಮತ್ತು ಜೀವ ವಿಜ್ಞನನ / Physics, Chemistry and Biology) 
(ಆಂಗ್ಲ ಮಾಧ್ಯಮ / English  Medium ) 
 
ವಿಷಯ ಸಂಕ ೇತ : 83-E 
ಸಮಯ : 3 ಗಂಟೆ 15 ನಿಮಿಷಗಳು  ] 
ಗರಿಷಠ ಅಂಕಗಳು : 80 ]  Subject Code : 83-E 
 
[Time: 3 Hours 15 Minutes  
 
[Max. Marks: 80  
 
 
General Instructions to the Candidate:  
1. There are three parts in the question paper:  
Part A: Physics, Part B: Chemistry, Part C Biology.  
2. This question paper consists of 38 questions.  
3. Follow the instructions given against the questions.  
4. Figures in the right hand margin indicate maximum marks for the 
questions.  
5. The maximum time to answer the paper is given at the top of the 
question paper.  It includes 15 minutes for reading the question 
paper.  
2 
 83-E 
PART  – A 
( PHYSICS  ) 
I. Four  alternatives  are given  for each  of the following  questions  / incomplete  
statements.  Choose  the correct  alternative  and  write  the complete  answer  along  
with  its letter  of alphabet.          2 × 1 = 2 
1. The diameter of the reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is  
(A) pole of the mirror    
(B) centre of curvature  
(C) principal axis  
(D) aperture  
2. When three resistors of different resistance are connected in parallel  in an electric 
circuit  and switched on , the n the quantity that remains the same in all the 
resistors  is 
(A) current     
(B) potential difference  
(C) resistance     
(D) resistivity  
II. Answer  the following  questions :         2 × 1 = 2  
3. What are the reasons for overload in an electric circuit?   
  
3 83-E  
 
[ Turn over  4. Two situations of freely suspended parallel copper  wires carrying current are 
shown in the figure  given below .  
 
In which of these situation s, the wires attract  each other ? Justify your answer.  
III. Answer  the following  questions :                                 3 × 2 = 6  
5. What is the colour of danger signal lights? Why is that colour preferred ? 
6. Among nichrome and copper wire s, which  of the  wire s is used in electric fan and 
in the coils of electric heater? Why?  
7. Draw the diagram indicating the field lines of the magnetic field around a current -
carrying straight conductor.  
IV. Answer  the following  questions  :       3 × 3 = 9  
8. Draw the ray diagram to show the image formation when an object is kept 
between  ‘C’ and ‘F’ of a concave mirror. Write the nature and size of the image 
formed. [C = Centre of curvature, F = Principal Focus]  
9. Explain an experiment  to demonstrate that  a current carrying conductor placed 
in a magnetic field experiences a force.  
OR 
Explain an activity to draw  the magnetic field lines around a bar magnet using a 
compass  needle .  
